Explainer: Separate APIs for URL-scoped badge vs document badge (#51)
WICG/badging: explainer.md

The **Badging API** is a proposed Web Platform API allowing websites to apply
badges (small status indicators) to pages or sets of pages on their origin. We
are deliberately agnostic about which contexts a badge can appear in, but there

> are two major categories of context that will be supported:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are two major categories of context that we would like to support:
```

As this feature is UI heavy, I need the document to be framed in a manner that I can pitch internally to our Firefox Product Team **as a proposal**. I.e., it can't be read like "this is how it's going to be", as the Product team will actually decided what gets implemented in Firefox. 

I know this is different than how Google/Chrome teams work... and Firefox may opt not to support the scoping stuff if we find it too complicated to implement/invest time in over other web features.

Author: Note that "supported" here refers to the functionality that would be supported if everything in this document was implemented. It doesn't make any claims about implementations supporting it. And these two sides to the API are designed to be implementable independently (neither reqiures the other). So I don't see any conflict here with Firefox's plan to not (initially) support scoping side of the API.

I'm not sure if this is just about this sentence, or more general. In general, I don't see the point of rewriting "we will do X" sentences as "we would like to do X". By definition, every sentence in the proposal is conditional on the proposal being accepted.

To resolve this, I've rewritten it as "we are specifying methods to handle two major different categories of context".

> Firefox may opt not to support the scoping stuff if we find it too complicated to implement/invest time in over other web features.

I think that would be fine, if you don't plan to support app badging (just document badging). That is the intention: if you are only badging documents while they are open, just implement the "ForDocument" methods. If you want to have persistent badges on shortcuts to websites while the site itself is not open (e.g., installed apps, but you could also apply the badge to other shortcuts such as links on the desktop, bookmarks, etc), then you implement the "ForScope" methods.

For that latter use case, we are all open to any proposal that lets us get away with not tying the badge to a URL scope. But nobody has suggested any. This is not a solution in search of a problem. We have a very clear problem: allow a site to set a semi-permanent badge on the icon of an installed web app, which persists even after the last window closes, and can be set by a service worker when no windows are open. Scoped URLs is our take on the solution.

![Android home screen badge](images/android-badge.png)
<br>Android home screen badge

Unlike document badges, badges applied to apps can be shown and updated even

> when there are no tabs or windows open for the app. After much deliberation, we

Reviewer: I'd prefer that we drop the  "After much deliberation"... we should just focus on explaining how it works, and explain we have two separate methods as part of their definition (i.e., because of "different scoping and lifetime considerations").

## Usage examples

The API is divided into two parts: one for setting/clearing a badge on the
current document, and one for setting/clearing a badge on the current
application.

To simply set a numeric badge on the current document:

```js
navigator.setClientBadge(getUnreadCount());
```

If `getUnreadCount()` (the argument to `navigator.setClientBadge`) is 0, it will
automatically clear the badge.

If you just want to show a status indicator flag without a number, use the
Boolean mode of the API by calling `navigator.setClientBadge` without an
argument, and `navigator.clearClientBadge` (which might be done to indicate that
it is the player's turn to move in a multiplayer game):

```js
if (myTurn())
  navigator.setClientBadge();
else
  navigator.clearClientBadge();
```

All of the above set the badge *only* on the current document (e.g., in the page
tab), and won't affect any other documents, even those at the same URL. To set a
badge that applies to the current app:

```js
navigator.setAppBadge(getUnreadCount());
```

> As above, a value of 0 clears the badge and `navigator.clearAppBadge` can also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As above, a value of 0 clears the badge and `navigator.clearAppBadge()` can also
```

> explicitly clear the badge for this origin. The effects of the app API are

Reviewer: "origin" could be read as it leaks outside its scope, but it really just relates to the installed web application. 
 
```suggestion
explicitly clear the badge for this installed web application. The effects of the app API are
```

global and may outlast the document (it is intended to persist at least until
the user agent closes). It can also be used from a service worker, although the
meaning of that will be somewhat different.

> The reason we have separate APIs is that they have very different concerns which

Reviewer: We might want to move this up to the overview.... we can probably drop "which are now properly separated:".

are now properly separated:

* The push message complexity only applies to the app API.
* The lifetime of the app API is considerably different to the document API.
* The presence of the document API itself indicates whether the tab will be
  badged in the UI (obviating the need for a dedicated feature detection method
  specifically for tab badging).

Other reasons to separate:

* Sites that only want to badge their app icon or only want to badge their tab
  can just concern themselves with the relevant API.
* The document API can potentially support badges that aren't supported by host

>   operating systems, such as arbitrary Unicode characters.

Reviewer: Should make it clear that this is currently not supported by the proposal, but a future extension reliant on implementer feedback.

> User agents may provide either or both of the two APIs, so sites should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User agents may expose either or both of the two APIs, so sites should
```

feature-detect them individually. In particular, this allows you to fall back to
showing your own badge in the page favicon or title if the

> `navigator.setClientBadge` API is not available (regardless of the availability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`navigator.setClientBadge()` API is not available (regardless of the availability
```

of the app API). This is a complete example for a site that wants to set the
badge on both the current document and for apps across the origin:

```js
// Should be called whenever the unread count changes (new mail arrives, or mail
// is marked read/unread).
function unreadCountChanged(newUnreadCount) {
  // Set the app badge, for app icons and links. This has a global and
  // semi-permanent effect, outliving the current document.
  if (navigator.setAppBadge) {
    navigator.setAppBadge(newUnreadCount);
  }

  // Set the document badge, for the current tab / window icon.
  if (navigator.setClientBadge) {
    navigator.setClientBadge(newUnreadCount);
  } else {
    // Fall back to setting favicon (or page title).
    // (This is a user-supplied function, not part of the Badge API.)
    showBadgeOnFavicon(newUnreadCount);
  }
}
```

More advanced examples are given in a [separate document](docs/examples.md).

## Usage from service workers

**TODO**: This section could use some fleshing out.

Calling the API from a service worker has some differences:

> * `navigator.setClientBadge` either shouldn't be callable from service workers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `navigator.setClientBadge()` either shouldn't be callable from service workers,
```

  or it would need a `Client` argument to specify which document to badge.

> * When `navigator.setAppBadge` is called from a service worker, it badges all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When `navigator.setAppBadge()` is called from a service worker, it badges all
```

## Usage examples

The API is divided into two parts: one for setting/clearing a badge on the
current document, and one for setting/clearing a badge applied to a particular
scope.

To simply set a numeric badge on the current document:

```js

> Badge.setForDocument(getUnreadCount());

Reviewer: I wonder if we can can imply "document" if `{scope}` is missing?:

```
// document
Badge.set(5);
// some explicit scope
Badge.set(5, {scope: ""});
```

Reviewer: > What about browsers where setting a document Badge is not supported?

That's something I hope we can avoid. At a minimum, document level badging should be supported, with scope level badging being optional... 

> On a separate note, I'm not convinced that document badges are the most natural default. Most of the time, a developer's intention is probably to badge all pages in an app .

Heh, I take the opposite view :) **P**-WAs are, after all, "Progressive" enhancements... "installed app" is never a default state of an application. In the rare case that an application is promoted to "installed", then that's great for the app - in that `{scope: "path"}` would work.

Reviewer 2: > Heh, I take the opposite view :) P-WAs are, after all, "Progressive" enhancements... "installed app" is never a default state of an application. In the rare case that an application is promoted to "installed", then that's great for the app - in that {scope: "path"} would work.

I don't mean for an installed application  ("app" is super overloaded term, I probably shouldn't've used it). I mean that conceptually, it is 'Facebook' that has an unread count, not each individual facebook.com tab. Even without installable PWAs there's a 'Facebook' thing that has a notification count (and I don't think that's a single open tab).

Reviewer: ok yeah, that's the bit that's still open for debate (and yes, let's stop using "app":)). I'm still wanting sites/developers to self manage their own scopes (through broadcast channel or whatever) - but can understand why the browser managing it takes some of that pain away.

Author: > That's something I hope we can avoid. At a minimum, document level badging should be supported, with scope level badging being optional...

The point of this PR (and the direction we're trying to take the API with) is that, after a lot of discussion with many stakeholders (including the TAG review) we realised that these are just two separate APIs with very different properties (one is global, the other is document-local; one has a lifetime beyond that of the document, the other's lifetime is tied to the document; one works from service workers, the other is meaningless in that context).

Given that we have basically identified two different APIs, I don't think user agents need to support one of these APIs before they support the other. We don't initially intend to implement the document-level badging API because it doesn't fit with our priorities, as you don't initially intend to implement the scope-level API. I think these things can exist independently.

Reviewer: Apologies, I hadn't seen any updates to https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/387 ? Was that discussion happening elsewhere (particularly around splitting the two APIs)? 

I can definitely live with that (as it's good during this incubation phase!), but it does feel a bit odd/confusing that we will have two APIs that basically do very similar things.

Author: Sorry, maybe you were out of that loop.

It's something we discussed offline with @alice (from TAG) and then as a result of that, we added [this section](https://github.com/WICG/badging/blob/master/explainer.md#a-case-for-separation) to the current explainer. (I somehow thought you were part of this discussion because I thought you were pushing for separate APIs from earlier on when I was trying to combine them.)

This PR is just me taking the "case for separation" part of that explainer and updating the rest of the document to do what it suggested.

The main motivation for this was a) the fact that a combined API had a complicated feature detection story (as discussed in the recent comments on the TAG review) and b) the complexity of dealing with nested scopes applied to pages --- we still have nested scopes in the new proposal, but they only apply to "handles" so you are much less likely to have a complex nesting of badge scopes since if you just want to badge individual pages you'll just use the document API.

> I can definitely live with that (as it's good during this incubation phase!), but it does feel a bit odd/confusing that we will have two APIs that basically do very similar things.

It does a bit, but we'll spec them together in one document (they won't be "separate APIs" but just separate methods), and I think we have a good story for what the differences are. (If we let scopes apply to pages and the document API just overrides that, then it becomes murkier and harder to reason about, which is why I favour a clean separation where the scope API does not badge active documents at all, just inactive handles like app icons.)

Author: @marcoscaceres Do you have any final thoughts (veto?) about this before I merge?

Reviewer: Just going through the document now. However, I'm still wondering if the TAG as a whole will take a position on this, as opposed to individual TAG members? for instance, I've also be talking to @dbaron about `scope` and concerns about complexity (but don't preclude David reaching a different position to mine) -  hence asking for a TAG position that would close  w3ctag/design-reviews#387.

```

If `getUnreadCount()` (the argument to `Badge.setForDocument`) is 0, it will
automatically clear the badge.

If you just want to show a status indicator flag without a number, use the
Boolean mode of the API by calling `Badge.setForDocument` without an argument,
and `Badge.clearForDocument` (which might be done to indicate that it is the
player's turn to move in a multiplayer game):

```js
if (myTurn())
  Badge.setForDocument();
else
  Badge.clearForDocument();
```

All of the above set the badge *only* on the current document (e.g., in the page

> tab), and won't badge installed apps that have no window open. To set a badge

Author: > * unclear what "e.g. in the page tab" means? The favicon?

It's deliberately vague. It doesn't have to appear on the favicon, just somewhere in the page tab (or window border, etc).

> * "won't badge installed apps that have no window open". I take it you mean we could badge the window icon if we wanted, but it took a while to parse.

Yeah, OK, reworded as "won't affect any other documents, even those at the same URL".

that applies to all apps and other "handles" on the current origin:

```js
Badge.setForScope(getUnreadCount());
```

As above, a value of 0 clears the badge and `Badge.clearForScope` can also
explicitly clear the badge for this origin. The effects of the scope API are

> global and may outlast the document (it is intended to persist until the user

Author: Added "at least".

  badged in the UI (obviating the need for a dedicated feature detection method
  specifically for tab badging).

Other reasons to separate:

* Sites that only want to badge their app icon or only want to badge their tab
  can just concern themselves with the relevant API.
* The document API can potentially support badges that aren't supported by host
  operating systems, such as arbitrary Unicode characters.

User agents may provide either or both of the two APIs, so sites should
feature-detect them individually. In particular, this allows you to fall back to
showing your own badge in the page favicon or title if the
`Badge.setForDocument` API is not available (regardless of the availability of
the scope API). This is a complete example for a site that wants to set the
badge on both the current document and for apps/handles across the origin:

```js
// Should be called whenever the unread count changes (new mail arrives, or mail
// is marked read/unread).
function unreadCountChanged(newUnreadCount) {
  // Set the "handle" badge, for app icons and links. This has a global and
  // semi-permanent effect, outliving the current document.
  if (Badge && Badge.setForScope) {

>     Badge.setForScope(newUnreadCount);

Author: Probably separate sections. We'd try to have them listed separately on caniuse but I don't want to write two different specs because they're closely related.

>     Badge.setForScope(newUnreadCount);

Reviewer 2: SGTM :)

  }

  // Set the "document" badge, for the current tab / window icon.
  if (Badge && Badge.setForDocument) {
    Badge.setForDocument(newUnreadCount);
  } else {
    // Fall back to setting favicon (or page title).

>     showBadgeOnFavicon(newUnreadCount);

Author: Added a note. (Note that this is not a polyfill, it's a user-supplied function. A polyfill is a user-space implementation of a system API.)

  }
}
```

> More advanced examples are given in a [separate document](docs/examples.md).

Reviewer 2: You probably need to update examples.md too

Author: I'll do that later, depending on whether we commit to this.

## Nested scopes

Since we allow badges to be scoped to different, potentially nested, URLs, it

> means that a particular handle can be subject to more than one badge at a time.

Author: I think it's reasonably established by the opening paragraphs of the document.

The [Push API](https://www.w3.org/TR/push-api/) allows servers to send messages
to service workers, which can run JavaScript code even when no foreground page

> is running. Thus, a server push could trigger a `navigator.setAppBadge`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is running. Thus, a server push could trigger a `navigator.setAppBadge()`.
```

is a proposed extension to the [Background
Sync](https://wicg.github.io/BackgroundSync/spec/) API, that allows a service
worker to periodically poll the server, which could be used to get an updated

> status and call `navigator.setAppBadge`. However, this API is unreliable: the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status and call `navigator.setAppBadge()`. However, this API is unreliable: the
```

the Push API spec, but only at a very high level.)

Instead of allowing the service worker to run JavaScript code and call the
Badge API, we would introduce a new concept to a Push subscription called a
"channel", which dictates what is done with the payload upon receipt. The
default channel would be "event" (the payload is delivered to the `"push"`
event), with a new channel, "badge", which imposes a specific format to the
payload. The payload would now be interpreted as a JSON dictionary containing

> parameters to the `navigator.setAppBadge` API. Upon receipt of the push, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameters to the `navigator.setAppBadge()` method. Upon receipt of the push, the
```

need to know whether the badge is displayed on a tab icon or on an app icon.

However, a practical concern overrides this: because the favicon can be (and
often is) used to display a page badge, sites upgrading to the Badge API need
to know whether they need to fall back to setting the favicon (since,
presumably, they don't want the badge being displayed twice). So we need to
provide a way to feature detect — not just "whether the Badge API is supported",
but "whether a Badge-API badge will show up on or near the favicon".

> Therefore, we will explicitly specify that if the `navigator.setClientBadge`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, we will explicitly specify that if the `navigator.setClientBadge()`
```

method exists, the user agent MUST show a badge set through this method on or
near the favicon. Therefore, sites can reliably use the presence of this method
to fall back to a conventional favicon or title badge:

```js
if (navigator.setClientBadge) {
  navigator.setClientBadge(getUnreadCount());
} else {
  // Fall back to setting favicon (or page title).
  // (This is a user-supplied function, not part of the Badge API.)
  showBadgeOnFavicon(getUnreadCount());
}
```

> A user agent could provide the `setAppBadge` API without `setClientBadge`, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A user agent could provide the `setAppBadge()` method without `setClientBadge()`, which
```

means the above check will apply the fallback, while app icons can still be
badged.

## Detailed API proposal

### The model

A badge is associated with either a document, or an [installed app](https://www.w3.org/TR/appmanifest/#installable-web-applications).

At any time, the badge for a specific document or app, if it is set, may be either:

* A "flag" indicating the presence of a badge with no contents, or
* A positive integer.

The model does not allow a badge to be a negative integer, or the integer value 0 (setting the badge to 0 is equivalent to clearing the badge).

The user agent is allowed to clear all badges on an origin whenever there are no foreground pages open on the origin (the intention of this is so that when the user agent quits, it does not need to serialize all the badge data and restore it on start-up; sites should re-apply the badge when they open).

### The API

> The Badge API methods are members of interface is a member object on

Reviewer: I think the API definition is redundant now (all of this has already been mentioned above)... plus it's starting to look like a spec. We should just add to the spec. Risk is that this explainer will quickly fall out of date.

Author: I think (at least for now) this serves a useful purpose of being in between the usage examples and the (non-existent) spec.

The usage examples show the basic usage but don't describe what the methods do and their arguments.

The spec will be very dense and state algorithms, not an informal description.

I like having an informal description of the methods (which is why I deleted the WebIDL and went back to this "conversational" documentation. Eventually this should be the role of MDN or similar, but for now, I'd like to keep it here.

  match, the method has no effect. (Zero or one apps.)
* If called from a service worker, this refers to all apps whose scope URL
  [matches the service worker
  registration](https://www.w3.org/TR/service-workers-1/#scope-match-algorithm)
  of this service worker. (Zero or more apps.)

**Note**: Should we have a separate overload for boolean flags now, as discussed in [Issue 19](https://github.com/WICG/badging/issues/19) and [Issue 42](https://github.com/WICG/badging/issues/42)?

### UX treatment
Badges may appear in any place that the user agent deems appropriate. In general, these places should be obviously related to the pages being badged, so users understand what the status is for.

Appropriate places for a document badge could include:

- Tab favicons.
- OS-specific contexts for app window icons if the document is open in a [standalone window](https://www.w3.org/TR/appmanifest/#display-modes).

App badges are shown in OS-specific contexts. User agents should attempt reuse existing [operating system APIs and conventions](docs/implementation.md), to achieve a native look-and-feel for the badge.

## Security and Privacy Considerations

> The API is write-only, so data badged can't be used to track a user. Whether the API is present could possibly be used as a bit of entropy to fingerprint users, but this is the case for all new APIs.

Reviewer: We should probably mention that it's only exposed in secure contexts and not available to third-party iframe unless explicitly granted by feature policy.

Author: Secure contexts: Done

Third-party iframe: We actually do allow this, but if you call the method from an iframe, you set the badge on the iframed contents' origin, not the containing page. This seems reasonable to me.

Reviewer: > Third-party iframe: We actually do allow this, but if you call the method from an iframe, you set the badge on the iframed contents' origin, not the containing page. This seems reasonable to me.

heh... I kinda like that :) We might need to keep some kind of open issue around this as I have a feeling it's going to come up for discussion. I think the main pushback we will get from this API is that it risks high user annoyance, so we need to have a good story in place for third-party iframes.

to know whether they need to fall back to setting the favicon (since,
presumably, they don't want the badge being displayed twice). So we need to
provide a way to feature detect — not just "whether the Badge API is supported",
but "whether a Badge-API badge will show up on or near the favicon".

Therefore, we will explicitly specify that if the `Badge.setForDocument` method
exists, the user agent MUST show a badge set through this method on or near the
favicon. Therefore, sites can reliably use the presence of this method to fall
back to a conventional favicon or title badge:

```js

> if (Badge && Badge.setForDocument) {

Author: Fixed to the former.

  Badge.setForDocument(getUnreadCount());
} else {
  // Fall back to setting favicon (or page title).
  showBadgeOnFavicon(getUnreadCount());
}
```

A user agent could provide the `setForScope` API without `setForDocument`, which
means the above check will apply the fallback, while app icons can still be
badged.

## Detailed API proposal

### The model

A badge is associated with either a document, or a [scope](https://www.w3.org/TR/appmanifest/#navigation-scope).

> * A document is only badged by a badge associated with that document (not by

Author: Added a paragraph explaining why this restriction is required.

If we don't have this restriction, we may as well keep the two APIs combined into one. Yes, it brings back the feature detection problem for favicon hacks. It also takes control away from individual documents about when and how they want to be badged (there is no way to have certain documents have no badge, when the outer scope is badged).
